I've always felt that the military was one way you
could pay some rent on the space you occupied in
this country. In other words, patriotism. Call it
what you want. And I don't know how much of it's
hereditary, how much of it's A&M. I've always been
a fairly conscientious soldier.
During 1961, when we were
down in Fort Polk, or early 1962, and we were on
maneuvers, Iron Dragon,
and I was Combat Command, Sea Command. General
West called me up one night. I know he was under
pressure. He told me, I want you to send One outfit
that way and one outfit that way. Do you
understand? I said, yes, sir. So at the break, I
went up to General West, and I said, General, I'd
like to talk to you privately. And he said, what's
it about? I said, would you step outside the tent
where we could talk privately? I said, General, I
like my job, and I know there's no profit in this
conversation. But did you realize the two of us
were trying to run the same outfit? I said, if you
just tell me what you want done, I'll work my butt
off to get it done. And if I don't, you can have my
head. But will you let me run my
own outfit? But I used to tell my battalions down
there, If my staff comes in there and tries to run
your outfit and you don't kick them out, then I'm
going to look at you. Because I'm paying you, or the
government is, to run your outfit. And if I find you
can't, I'll get somebody else. That's the way I
feel. I also feel that there's no one guy that's so
important we can't get along with that.
That's about my story. What did you decide to go in
the Texas National Guard instead of the Army
Reserves? Well, I was already in the Army Reserves
when I got out. I signed up for it. See, the Texas
National Guard or any National Guard, you have a
dual commission. Reserve Washington, federally
recognized guard, too. I got in that by the back
door. Travis Bryan, Sr., who I've been friends
with for a long, long time.
He had many, many friends in the military. He
called me one day and he said, come on down to the
bank. I want to talk to you. Was this in 1947? 1946.
He had a Colonel Fitzhugh, who was senior advisor
And I said, we were forming probably late 46. I
said, we're forming the 49th Army Division. The
division headquartered the engineer battalion.
Brian would like you to take it over. I said, all
right. So they hadn't formed the headquarters, so
they couldn't have a battalion commander. They
had formed the headquarters company. So I took
federal recognition as a captain and a motor
officer. Is that why you went, you skipped down to a
captain, you were a major, you went down to a
captain, then you went back up to a lieutenant
colonel, and you skipped the major? Will you
explain how you kept skipping around in the ranks
for a couple of months? Well, the reason why was
they hadn't formed the headquarters. You see,
each unit has what we call a table of
organizational equipment, you see. for one
lieutenant colonel, one major, two majors, so on.
And they didn't have a headquarters, so they
didn't have a spot for a lieutenant colonel. They
had a headquarters company, you see. So I took a job
as captain motor officer, just to go on and get
here. And got federally recognized captaincy.
And the minute they formed the headquarters, then
I got federally recognized lieutenant colonel.
And I commanded the unit for 11 years.
And I finally went to CG, and I said, General, I've
been commanding this unit for 11 years. All I'm
doing now is going over the same old things again
and again. And I said, I'm holding up everybody
else in my outfit. He said, have you got a job on the
staff? He said, maybe. So I became a trains
commander. Now,
what did you do with the 386th armored engineering
battalion? What did I do with it? Tell me about the
signs. What was your task? Well, we had the
headquarters company, bridge company, three
lines. So you had a total personnel of what?
Between 800 and 1,000. And what I did with it, I feel
like I made one of the best battalions in the 49th
Army. So you did a lot of training? Yes, sir. We did a
lot of training. We did a lot of planning. C.B.
Hewitt, Cap Hewitt was
my exec. And we'd have planning sessions, what if
we got people out of the railroad center, you know,
which I'd been through. How would we handle that
situation? What if this, what if that? And try to do
those things. And, of course, we had to go through
whatever training cycles were prescribed by the
military. But
we just tried to be the people that did our job. Did
Korea have any impact on your job? No, it didn't,
except it had an impact on my business.
The number one latrine room was flying fast and
thick, and I could not see going back active duty
for the business. And it prompted me to sell out to
my partner, who later went broke. In other words,
you thought then that you would be called up during
the Korean War? Yes, sir. In fact, the rumors were
real strife. And later on, I talked to Johnny
Johnson, and he said, I just finally went to
Washington.
And he said, I was flat-ass. And they said,
General, we were fixing to call one more division,
specifically the 49th Armored Division. when we
decided not to call it a morning. So that's how
close to 50 we came to it. How are your feelings? Did
you want
to go to a funeral? Not particularly, but like I
said, they tell me where to go, I go. It's about that
simple. Did your training techniques change in
any way because of the war? Did you train more
intensively?
Did you meet more often? No. For a long time, we met
on Monday nights.
One thing we were certainly aware of was what our
strengths and what our limitations
were. We must necessarily have some limitations.
Then they went to what they called
which instead of meeting Monday night, four
nights a month or five nights, we had a drill on
Saturday and Sunday, and you got credit for four
drills. You got paid on basically four drills
where you could get more done. So you could get more
done on the weekend. Right. How about morale? Did
it have any impact on morale? I don't think so. It
had either way. You see, we had two types of people.
One
of them was
former people during the war. The others were
those who perhaps took that in lieu of being
drafted.
Was there any conflict between these two
different types?
It was in every organization. We had Goodwin's and
we had Sargent's. But I had my niece's husband
who lived in his private and rose off fast and got to
start approaching Sargent. In fact, he was
recommended for it. So we sat back and looked, and
we devised a test and decreed that in our battalion
that nobody got to be promoted above a corporal
without passing the test. And we instituted
various stations. We'd set them up. Said, we're
not telling you, company commander, who you can
promote or not promote. All we can tell you is if he
doesn't pass it, we won't accept him. And we'd set
up first aid stations We wanted to know first aid
and sanitation. We wanted to know
how to field strip an M1 rifle, machine gun, things
that basically, if you were a specialist, such as a
demolition specialist, we want to know what the
safety procedures were, how to wire parallel and
series, and what the effects were, all of those
things. So your mission was training? Sir? Your
mission was training? Yes, sir. And preparation?
Yes, sir. And we knew what our limitations were
and what our strengths were. That's exactly what
it was. Okay, after 11 years of this stuff, You
moved down to the 49th Army Division? Division
trains.
You stayed there for three years, and what was your
mission now? Again, training. I don't know if
you're familiar with trains, but that's your
support units, your ordnance battalion, your
quartermaster battalion, all of those, and the
band.
I set standards. It was like I went to
Quartermaster Battalion at one time. And they
were good out there. You were activated in 1961
during the Berlin crisis, and you were activated
for, let's say, about ten months, from 61 to August
of 62. Why were you activated? The whole division
was activated. The entire division was
activated? The president has that right. And so,
where'd you go?
We went to Louisiana. See, in June, I had to come
back and
come in secretly. We went to Louisiana. Was there a
lot of war going on? No, not particularly. It was a
Berlin crisis. It could have developed into
something. But our mission was to get ready and be
effective. And we made it. General West, our
division commander at the time, was one of the few
people who could carry us through and face the
difficulties. Everything there, even support
groups were reserved, Baton Rouge and so forth and
there. And we were put under considerable
intolerable situations with really lack of
funding. He had to do a lot of deficit funding. And I
really think the feel that the Army expected us to
make,
maybe a full-time professional soldier feels a
part-time professional soldier can't do it. In
other words, was there a conflict, an antagonism
between the regulars and the
reserves? Oh,
yes and no. It's difficult to answer. The regular
army knows it can't fight a war by itself, but by the
same token, I guess we'd be known as weekend
warriors, which a full-time professional man
doesn't connote the highest respect as a group, as
an individual might
be. But they were ill-prepared and things. See,
the problem with the military, like a lot of other
things, they have these problems. They create
solutions. Those people are retiring some new
people. See, they had all this replacements. And I
got a list of them all over the Southwest,
Louisiana, New Mexico. Half those people moved to
another place, something. People had been off
duty six months. Gotten married, started in the
business, suddenly got recalled to duty without
any warning. They finally had to come out with a
pamphlet on it. Things like that.
Doesn't breathe the greatest of things. But...
Did you like being back on the
active duty? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I've never had any
aversion
to the military. The hardest job I ever had in my
life was being a company commander. Why was that?
That's a 26-hour day job.
And how big was your company? 200
people. I don't know. It was just the hardest job. I
worked hard at being a battalion commander, and I
worked hard at being a combat commander, division
training commander. But it seemed to be more, I was
directly responsible for every troop around
there, 24 hours a day. Of course,
it was wartime. But... I had no aversion to going
back to active duty. It was something of an
upheaval. But again, you pay your money and you
take the chances. Do you think the fact that you
were on active duty, do you think that that had some
impact on your being promoted to brigadier
general shortly thereafter? I don't think
there's any question
of that. I think I had the the sharpest operation
down there. Some of the other combat commanders
might question that. But I do know that we set up our
own standing operating procedure for day and
night, worked it out ourselves. I do know that the
division standing operating procedure was
copied from it. In fact, they accidentally left
some words in it pertaining to us. We just set up and
organized. I knew what I wanted. See, they rotated
battalions. And when a battalion came into our
thing, we handed them a sheet of paper and said,
this will bring you up to date. Now, we hold
Reveille and retreat formation are not spelled
out exactly in the regulations. We said, this is
the way we do Reveille, and this is the way we do
retreat, and everybody does it the same way. Any
questions?
And they could read all of that and bring them up to
where
we operate. How did you first learn that you were
going to be promoted to
general? Oh. That was an interesting and long
story. I was probably the senior qualified
colonel at the time. An interesting story,
if you want to hear it. It took six months. It took
six months until you got the word? No. What do you
mean it took six months? It took six months for me to
get federally recognized. Well, when we got back
from Polk, Assistant Division Commander Jim
Scott, who I served with for a long time,
became Assistant Adjutant General Army, which
opened up the spot. So my papers were duly sent in to
the National Guard Bureau. And they came back and
said, we're sorry.
But the regulations prescribe
that when there's only one Assistant Adjutant
General and the Adjutant General is Army, the
Assistant Adjutant General has to be Air.
Therefore, the spot wasn't vacant. Although he
was still Adjutant General, he was still
technically carried. He carried his Assistant
Division Commander.
So they got a bill through at the last of the
legislative session, which provided for an
assisted action for General Ayers. And it was a
catch-all bill, and it was on a voice vote. So they
again submitted my papers, and the National Guard
Bureau came back and said, we're sorry, but under
Texas law,
when it's not a vote of record, the law doesn't come
effective until 90 days after the cessation of the
legislature. So I had to wait another 90
days. In other words, is there a lot of politics in
the
House? No. The old 36th Division, I think, over the
years, developed politics in the inns and the
houses. I think the 49th was rather singularly
free of politics. I never did feel like I wasn't
politically well-connected, that my promotions
had anything to do with just being the right guy at
the right time. Because
we were singularly free of politics.
I hear that National
Guard is more political than the Army Reserve.
Would you comment on that? Perhaps.
Because the Army Guard, although federally
recognized, the Adjutant General is
state-employed.
Within the state of Texas now, in some states, a new
governor comes in, he appoints a new Adjutant
General. And in the past year,
many years past, when the governor wanted to get
rid of an Adjutant General, and the paper would
come out about using a government vehicle for
personal business or something, we'd finally put
enough pressure on him to resign. But we have more
or less had an unwritten deal with governors for
several years that they don't do that. And when
Governor Clements came into office, the same
acting general was under Dolph Briscoe. And when
Dolph Briscoe came in, whoever was acting general
was still the same. So we've had some excellent
continuity. So I'd say that we're less political
than perhaps in other places. I can't speak for
other states. I'm sure in some instances there's
politics involved, particularly the old units,
perhaps the later units. In the 49th, it was almost
done. And with me, my criterion was Can they do it,
or can't they do it? If they can do it, they stay. If
they can't do it, they go. I figured I was paid to do a
job, and if I didn't do it, they ought to get
somebody else. That simple. You were made general
in 1963, and you had the assistant division CEO.
What did you do as far as that was concerned? I had
more fun as a colonel than a lieutenant colonel
ever had as assistant division commander. Why?
The duties of an assistant division commander,
according to regulations, are such duties as may
be delegated
by the division commander. In other words, this
right up here, in case they ever have a child, And
that's what an assistant military commander is. I
spent most of my time going out to the field,
visiting units, checking training, and as much to
be seen as to see. Let them see
somebody in the division headquarters and carry
them. General West has to make command
inspections of the various commands, but he can't
make them all. During this time, Vietnam was
starting to grow. Did you, were you in any way
interested in going over and volunteering for
that? No, not particularly. I was a member of an
organization.
See, we got through at Polk.
Well, before we got through, I left
a little early. I went up to Pentagon for about a
little over 30 days. They had a project in their hip
pocket
for about 17 months. They needed to develop a
command structure. For example, Louisiana and
Arkansas split a division for a long time. They
needed to have a command headquarters that could
take over the troops in those various states. And
so I was detailed, three or four of us were detailed
to work on. And we developed a command structure.
And I had to present to Chief of National Guard, and
he argued with me on several points, because I had a
small quartermaster section, a small hardening
section, and so on and so forth, maybe two officers
and three men. And what the criteria was, not more
than 200. Leave a little fat for the Army to cut out,
because they all want to cut out some. And the chief
said, we don't need those quartermaster people
and so forth. We can depend on troops at the post.
And I said, General, we can't depend on troops at
the post. I've been through that. They don't
necessarily know what's going on. I think we need
our own advisors. He bought it. And what I was
pleased with, it came out reasonably close to what
we went after. What did you think about the work at
the Pentagon? Oh, it was interesting.
The Army is not an efficient organization. It's
not designed to be. It's designed to fight wars.
They make mistakes. I used to tell my staff down at
Fort Polk, If you think I'm going to be right 100% of
the time, you better rearrange your thinking. I
said, I ought to be right 95% of the time. That 5% is
in minor areas. And I said, we'll do this. I'll
listen to any suggestion. You can call me an SOB,
and I won't take offense. But the very instant that
I said, that's fine. Now, this is the way we do it.
you better forget about
everything else. But that was an interesting
thing. I never meant to paint. What did you think of
the quality of all the sir that you were working
with that were at the Pentagon? High quality.
High? Yes. Basically, you thought the people that
run the regular professional army? Well, in the
Bureau, the Chief of National Guard for the U.S.
National Guard Office. And it happened to be that
the Chief of the Army Branch, General Clayton P.
Kerr, used to be a division commander, assistant
division commander. So I didn't go in blind.
In the past,
The local states like Rhode Island, Maryland,
places where they just run over the Pentagon,
maybe got a little more attention paid to them than
some of the southern or western
states. That's been changed now. The chief of the
National Guard Bureau now
He
used to be the staff assistant
of the Oklahoma National Guard. I've known him for
years. And he is the first
incident last year. He is the first incident of the
Chief National Guard Bureau being promoted to
lieutenant general. And he's a surgeon. He's
fine. During Vietnam, was When you were a general
in the National Guard, did that seem to have any
impact on the Guard in Texas? No. I counseled a lot
of people, not necessarily the Guard.
The Vietnam War was a particularly
war, more so than the Korean War was to me.
I remember during World War II, our entire
national effort was directed toward winning the
war, our entire national effort. People went to
Vietnam. I think it felt like that once they left,
that everybody went by their own day's business.
There was no national effort behind it. And
besides what I've been able to determine, it was a
dirty,
nasty war. And there's always been wars. During
this time, of course, you had the rise of a number of
women in the service, and the rise of blacks in the
service, or tremendous increase. Did that have
any impact on the National Guard here in Texas?
No.
We had, really we didn't have any women in the
National Guard. We didn't have any probation
before. The Reserves had some probation before,
but we didn't
have any. I don't know of any National Guard
hospitals and stuff, so we didn't have nurses.
They didn't have any secretaries? They were all
staff assistants. Blacks, we had some.
We didn't have any large
concentration. They never presented a real
problem. We had, at Fort Polk, we had a lot of
village blacks. And I had one lieutenant that I
thought the world
And he was in a predominantly Latin American
battalion. They could carry less.
Unfortunately, he could not cut the mustard, his
company commander. His battalion commander came
up and said, I need to make a change in certain
company. I said, that's all right with me. He said,
well, the man I'm putting in is black. I said, I
could carry less. Can he do the job? He said, I think
he can. I said, that's all right with me. And yet he
was top rated. But then I've seen whites the same
way. Why'd you retire?
Because I had a business that was just about to go
broke, and I quit in 30
years. And that business finally ended up costing
me a ton of money. In fact, it broke.
What business were you in? I went to Plymouth,
Minnesota. And I ended up owning the bank with a ton
of money, which it
took me several years to pay off. I don't owe
anybody a dime. What were your thoughts on when you
retired? Were you ready to... Get out of the
garbage? Not really. I like it. I like the people. I
imagine I like the rank.
I'm not happy I found out, being a general, that I
had to do one thing to change. Because if I pulled a
cigarette out, it would be about half a dozen
people trying to light it. So I had to get in the
habit of pulling my lighter out first. I'd rather
light
it on. But I liked
it. I just didn't understand it. And I missed it
when I got out. Now, when you were... In the
military, did
you think that your promotions were dependent on
the people that you knew, or maybe in the right
place at the right time, or were they more
dependent on your own behavior, your own actions,
and your accomplishments? I would hope they were
on my own behavior and my own actions. I would hope
so. Because when I got promoted to major, serving
under a VMI sick Lieutenant Colonel, regular
Army. And he picked me as his exec. He was the trial,
because he was sick.
I guess I've done a good job as Commander. Do you
think that people get ahead in the professional
world the same way that they get ahead in the
military world?
Do you think it takes the same type of attributes in
the military as other businesses, corporations?
Yes, I would say so.
If an individual expects to succeed in private
business and the military, he can't do it by just
saying, issuing an order. He's got to leave.
If you could never run and leave, would you define
leadership for him? Yes, sir, if I can. Leadership
is the ability to Anticipate, perhaps. Recognize
problems.
Make corrections.
Try to put the right people in the right places. No
one can do it all by themselves. And you've got to
have competent people. I had so many people down at
Fort Polk on my staff. It wasn't a question if I
didn't like the guy firing him and getting him out
and getting the other one in. I did have to make two
shifts,
which worked out. Because I had a man that could see
a tree, but he couldn't
see a forest. What kind of attributes do you think
leaders should have?
What kind of values? Well, he's got to have pretty
high
values. There's been an old saying that It makes no
difference whether it's a company or a battalion
or a brigade. If you've got a tough, tough
commander, you need an exec to go around and kind of
unruffle the feathers. If you've got a rather
easygoing commander, you need a tough exec to go
around and see a thing. I depend on my people. I had
an excellent executive officer. I told the
battalion commanders that we'll have meetings if
we got something to talk about. We're not going to
have daily meetings just to have daily meetings. I
see most of you every day somewhere anyhow. My exec
will have a meeting with your execs every day. But
you understand that what goes through that
channel is just the same as me telling you. And I
saved your time. Because I don't like to have me
just hear myself talk. If there's something to
talk about, fine, we'll get together. Otherwise,
get out and do your job. I suppose
so. I guess everybody aspires to the next higher
promotion. But I guess my consuming desire was to
do the best job I knew how. Whatever I do.
Because I figure that I'm paid to do a good job. And
the people under me are paid to do a good job. And I
feel like if they don't, it's my job to either
correct them or get rid of them. And I had a captain
down there. We were getting ready to come home. I
told him, I said, I suggest that you transfer to
another outfit somewhere because you're the last
captain I've
ever promoted. What did he do? He got out.
I sent him on advance to catch me down. He wrecked
his car.
I got to investigating it. He'd had two previous
wrecks. I can be pretty tough. I called him in, and I
said, you're grounded. I will not permit you to
have a car on this post. I said, I may not keep you
from getting killed, but I may keep somebody else
from getting killed. After three months, he came
up, and I said, all right, you go down and bring me a
prescription for new glasses
from
the doctor, and we'll see about it. But you can't
win them all. Sometimes
people have said that there's a military
mentality or a military way of thinking. The Army
does it one way, the civilian world does it the
other. Is there a military mentality? Yes, I think
so. What is it? Well, you're used to telling a man to
do something and telling him how to do it, and he
does it that way. There's been many things, but I
still say leadership and civilian occupation
leadership in the military is leading, not
driving.
Sir William Slim, have you ever heard of him? He was
a British general. and in the defeat in Malaysia.
And he used to talk about the military as a string of
instruments. And he said, the finest is a
battalion. I can know my people clear down the
line. But he said, even as a general, and I have
regimental commanders. I go to one and say, Jack, I
need that hill by 10 o'clock in the morning. He
says, okay. I go to the next one and I say, gosh, I'd
love to have that hill by 10 o'clock in the morning,
but I know you can't do it. He said, General, I
believe I can.
You have to know your people.
You have to try to correct mistakes, just like in
the civilian occupation. Perhaps there's a
little bit firmer thing. I've seen people that
swing their weight around. That doesn't really go
in the army. You've got
to wait for a while. But you have to lead
people in this. You know, frailty, there's no such
thing as a perfect soldier.
You have to approach it differently. I have one
last topic I'd like to talk about. Would you excuse
me for a few minutes?
Now I wanted to talk finally about one last thing.
Those changes that we've had at A&M, did you know
General Rudder? Yes, very well. What did you think
of Earl Rudder? I thought he was a tremendous
soldier.
I think he came to A&M as president during the very
prime time. You sure did. And under his tenure,
there are a number of changes, and I'd like to talk
about those. For example, ending the Mandatory
Corps. What was and what is your opinion of that? It
was a sign of the times. A&M cannot continue to be
all military. and be a large state university
at the same time. What about allowing women? I
think it's one of the greatest things that could
have happened. And I'll tell you what I base that
reasoning on, two or three things. I have talked to
many high school principals.
And the general consensus is that Somewhere along
the line, they will counsel with nearly every
student that's going on to college. And almost
without exception, they will recommend that go to
college. Their reasoning being that if you're
going to work with them, live with them the rest of
your life, why separate?